dill blushed and jem told me to hush, a sure sign that dill had been studied and found acceptable. thereafter the summer passed in routine contentment. routine contentment was: improving our treehouse that rested between giant twin chinaberry trees in the back yard, fussing, running through our list of dramas based on the works of oliver optic, victor appleton, and edgar rice burroughs. in this matter we were lucky to have dill. he played the character parts formerly thrust upon me—the ape in tarzan, mr. crabtree in the rover boys, mr. damon in tom swift. thus we came to know dill as a pocket merlin, whose head teemed with eccentric plans, strange longings, and quaint fancies.

the radley place fascinated dill. in spite of our warnings and explanations it drew him as the moon draws water, but drew him no nearer than the light-pole on the corner, a safe distance from the radley gate. there he would stand, his arm around the fat pole, staring and wondering.

the radley place jutted into a sharp curve beyond our house. walking south, one faced its porch; the sidewalk turned and ran beside the lot. the house was low, was once white with a deep front porch and green shutters, but had long ago darkened to the color of the slate-gray yard around it. rain-rotted shingles drooped over the eaves of the veranda; oak trees kept the sun away. the remains of a picket drunkenly guarded the front yard—a “swept” yard that was never swept—where johnson grass and rabbit-tobacco grew in abundance.

inside the house lived a malevolent phantom. people said he existed, but jem and i had never seen him. people said he went out at night when the moon was down, and peeped in windows. when people’s azaleas froze in a cold snap, it was because he had breathed on them. any stealthy small crimes committed in maycomb were his work. once the town was terrorized by a series of morbid nocturnal events: people’s chickens and household pets were found mutilated; although the culprit was crazy addie, who eventually drowned himself in barker’s eddy, people still looked at the radley place, unwilling to discard their initial suspicions. a negro would not pass the radley place at night, he would cut across to the sidewalk opposite and whistle as he walked. the maycomb school grounds adjoined the back of the radley lot; from the radley chickenyard tall pecan trees shook their fruit into the schoolyard, but the nuts lay untouched by the children: radley pecans would kill you. a baseball hit into the radley yard was a lost ball and no questions asked.

the misery of that house began many years before jem and i were born. the radleys, welcome anywhere in town, kept to themselves, a predilection unforgivable in maycomb. they did not go to church, maycomb’s principal recreation, but worshiped at home; mrs. radley seldom if ever crossed the street for a mid-morning coffee break with her neighbors, and certainly never joined a missionary circle. mr. radley walked to town at eleven-thirty every morning and came back promptly at twelve, sometimes carrying a brown paper bag that the neighborhood assumed contained the family groceries. i never knew how old mr. radley made his living—jem said he “bought cotton,” a polite term for doing nothing—but mr. radley and his wife had lived there with their two sons as long as anybody could remember.

