calpurnia was something else again. she was all angles and bones; she was nearsighted; she squinted; her hand was wide as a bed slat and twice as hard. she was always ordering me out of the kitchen, asking me why i couldn’t behave as well as jem when she knew he was older, and calling me home when i wasn’t ready to come. our battles were epic and one-sided. calpurnia always won, mainly because atticus always took her side. she had been with us ever since jem was born, and i had felt her tyrannical presence as long as i could remember.

our mother died when i was two, so i never felt her absence. she was a graham from montgomery; atticus met her when he was first elected to the state legislature. he was middle-aged then, she was fifteen years his junior. jem was the product of their first year of marriage; four years later i was born, and two years later our mother died from a sudden heart attack. they said it ran in her family. i did not miss her, but i think jem did. he remembered her clearly, and sometimes in the middle of a game he would sigh at length, then go off and play by himself behind the car-house. when he was like that, i knew better than to bother him.
dill was from meridian, mississippi, was spending the summer with his aunt, miss rachel, and would be spending every summer in maycomb from now on. his family was from maycomb county originally, his mother worked for a photographer in meridian, had entered his picture in a beautiful child contest and won five dollars. she gave the money to dill, who went to the picture show twenty times on it.
dill was a curiosity. he wore blue linen shorts that buttoned to his shirt, his hair was snow white and stuck to his head like duck-fluff; he was a year my senior but i towered over him. as he told us the old tale his blue eyes would lighten and darken; his laugh was sudden and happy; he habitually pulled at a cowlick in the center of his forehead. when dill reduced dracula to dust, and jem said the show sounded better than the book, i asked dill where his father was.