according to neighborhood legend, when the younger radley boy was in his teens he became acquainted with some of the cunninghams from old sarum, an enormous and confusing tribe domiciled in the northern part of the county, and they formed the nearest thing to a gang ever seen in maycomb. they did little, but enough to be discussed by the town and publicly warned from three pulpits: they hung around the barbershop; they rode the bus to abbottsville on sundays and went to the picture show; they attended dances at the county’s riverside gambling hall, the dew-drop inn & fishing camp; they experimented with stumphole whiskey. nobody in maycomb had nerve enough to tell mr. radley that his boy was in with the wrong crowd.

one night, in an excessive spurt of high spirits, the boys backed around the square in a borrowed flivver, resisted arrest by maycomb’s ancient beadle, mr. conner, and locked him in the courthouse outhouse. the town decided something had to be done; mr. conner said he knew who each and every one of them was, and he was bound and determined they wouldn’t get away with it, so the boys came before the probate judge on charges of disorderly conduct, disturbing the peace, assault and battery, and using abusive and profane language in the presence and hearing of a female. the judge asked mr. conner why he included the last charge; mr. conner said they cussed so loud he was sure every lady in maycomb heard them. the judge decided to send the boys to the state industrial school, where boys were sometimes sent for no other reason than to provide them with food and decent shelter: it was no prison and it was no disgrace. mr. radley thought it was. if the judge released arthur, mr. radley would see to it that arthur gave no further trouble. knowing that mr. radley’s word was his bond, the judge was glad to do so.

the other boys attended the industrial school and received the best secondary education to be had in the state; one of them eventually worked his way through engineering school at auburn. the doors of the radley house were closed on weekdays as well as sundays, and mr. radley’s boy was not seen again for fifteen years.



but there came a day, barely within jem’s memory, when boo radley was heard from and was seen by several people, but not by jem. he said atticus never talked much about the radleys: when jem would question him atticus’s only answer was for him to mind his own business and let the radleys mind theirs, they had a right to; but when it happened jem said atticus shook his head and said, “mm mm, mm.”

so jem received most of his information from miss stephanie crawford, a neighborhood scold, who said she knew the whole thing. according to miss stephanie, boo was sitting in the livingroom cutting some items from the maycomb tribune to paste in his scrapbook. his father entered the room. as mr. radley passed by, boo drove the scissors into his parent’s leg, pulled them out, wiped them on his pants, and resumed his activities.

mrs. radley ran screaming into the street that arthur was killing them all, but when the sheriff arrived he found boo still sitting in the livingroom, cutting up the tribune. he was thirty-three years old then.

miss stephanie said old mr. radley said no radley was going to any asylum, when it was suggested that a season in tuscaloosa might be helpful to boo. boo wasn’t crazy, he was high-strung at times. it was all right to shut him up, mr. radley conceded, but insisted that boo not be charged with anything: he was not a criminal. the sheriff hadn’t the heart to put him in jail alongside negroes, so boo was locked in the courthouse basement.

boo’s transition from the basement to back home was nebulous in jem’s memory. miss stephanie crawford said some of the town council told mr. radley that if he didn’t take boo back, boo would die of mold from the damp. besides, boo could not live forever on the bounty of the county.

nobody knew what form of intimidation mr. radley employed to keep boo out of sight, but jem figured that mr. radley kept him chained to the bed most of the time. atticus said no, it wasn’t that sort of thing, that there were other ways of making people into ghosts.

my memory came alive to see mrs. radley occasionally open the front door, walk to the edge of the porch, and pour water on her cannas. but every day jem and i would see mr. radley walking to and from town. he was a thin leathery man with colorless eyes, so colorless they did not reflect light. his cheekbones were sharp and his mouth was wide, with a thin upper lip and a full lower lip. miss stephanie crawford said he was so upright he took the word of god as his only law, and we believed her, because mr. radley’s posture was ramrod straight.

he never spoke to us. when he passed we would look at the ground and say, “good morning, sir,” and he would cough in reply. mr. radley’s elder son lived in pensacola; he came home at christmas, and he was one of the few persons we ever saw enter or leave the place. from the day mr. radley took arthur home, people said the house died.