jem and i had always enjoyed the free run of miss maudie’s yard if we kept out of her azaleas, but our contact with her was not clearly defined. until jem and dill excluded me from their plans, she was only another lady in the neighborhood, but a relatively benign presence.

our tacit treaty with miss maudie was that we could play on her lawn, eat her scuppernongs if we didn’t jump on the arbor, and explore her vast back lot, terms so generous we seldom spoke to her, so careful were we to preserve the delicate balance of our relationship, but jem and dill drove me closer to her with their behavior.

miss maudie hated her house: time spent indoors was time wasted. she was a widow, a chameleon lady who worked in her flower beds in an old straw hat and men’s coveralls, but after her five o’clock bath she would appear on the porch and reign over the street in magisterial beauty.

she loved everything that grew in god’s earth, even the weeds. with one exception. if she found a blade of nut-grass in her yard it was like the second battle of the marne: she swooped down upon it with a tin tub and subjected it to blasts from beneath with a poisonous substance she said was so powerful it’d kill us all if we didn’t stand out of the way.

“why can’t you just pull it up?” i asked, after witnessing a prolonged campaign against a blade not three inches high.

“pull it up, child, pull it up?” she picked up the limp sprout and squeezed her thumb up its tiny stalk. microscopic grains oozed out. “why, one sprig of nut-grass can ruin a whole yard. look here. when it comes fall this dries up and the wind blows it all over maycomb county!” miss maudie’s faced likened such an occurrence unto an old testament pestilence.

her speech was crisp for a maycomb county inhabitant. she called us by all our names, and when she grinned she revealed two minute gold prongs clipped to her eye-teeth. when i admired them and hoped i would have some eventually, she said, “look here.” with a click of her tongue she thrust out her bridgework, a gesture of cordiality that cemented our friendship.

miss maudie’s benevolence extended to jem and dill, whenever they paused in their pursuits: we reaped the benefits of a talent miss maudie had hitherto kept hidden from us. she made the best cakes in the neighborhood. when she was admitted into our confidence, every time she baked she made a big cake and three little ones, and she would call across the street: “jim finch, scout finch, charles baker harris, come here!” our promptness was always rewarded.

in summertime, twilights are long and peaceful. often as not, miss maudie and i would sit silently on her porch, watching the sky go from yellow to pink as the sun went down, watching flights of martins sweep low over the neighborhood and disappear behind the schoolhouse rooftops.
miss maudie had known uncle jack finch, atticus’s brother, since they were children. nearly the same age, they had grown up together at finch’s landing. miss maudie was the daughter of a neighboring landowner, dr. frank buford. dr. buford’s profession was medicine and his obsession was anything that grew in the ground, so he stayed poor. uncle jack finch confined his passion for digging to his window boxes in nashville and stayed rich. we saw uncle jack every christmas, and every christmas he yelled across the street for miss maudie to come marry him. miss maudie would yell back, “call a little louder, jack finch, and they’ll hear you at the post office, i haven’t heard you yet!” jem and i thought this a strange way to ask for a lady’s hand in marriage, but then uncle jack was rather strange. he said he was trying to get miss maudie’s goat, that he had been trying unsuccessfully for forty years, that he was the last person in the world miss maudie would think about marrying but the first person she thought about teasing, and the best defense to her was spirited offense, all of which we understood clearly.
my confidence in pulpit gospel lessened at the vision of miss maudie stewing forever in various protestant hells. true enough, she had an acid tongue in her head, and she did not go about the neighborhood doing good, as did miss stephanie crawford. but while no one with a grain of sense trusted miss stephanie, jem and i had considerable faith in miss maudie. she had never told on us, had never played cat-and-mouse with us, she was not at all interested in our private lives. she was our friend. how so reasonable a creature could live in peril of everlasting torment was incomprehensible.
dill stopped and let jem go ahead. when jem put his foot on the bottom step, the step squeaked. he stood still, then tried his weight by degrees. the step was silent. jem skipped two steps, put his foot on the porch, heaved himself to it, and teetered a long moment. he regained his balance and dropped to his knees. he crawled to the window, raised his head and looked in.

then i saw the shadow. it was the shadow of a man with a hat on. at first i thought it was a tree, but there was no wind blowing, and tree-trunks never walked. the back porch was bathed in moonlight, and the shadow, crisp as toast, moved across the porch toward jem.

dill saw it next. he put his hands to his face.

when it crossed jem, jem saw it. he put his arms over his head and went rigid.

the shadow stopped about a foot beyond jem. its arm came out from its side, dropped, and was still. then it turned and moved back across jem, walked along the porch and off the side of the house, returning as it had come.

jem leaped off the porch and galloped toward us. he flung open the gate, danced dill and me through, and shooed us between two rows of swishing collards. halfway through the collards i tripped; as i tripped the roar of a shotgun shattered the neighborhood.

dill and jem dived beside me. jem’s breath came in sobs: “fence by the schoolyard!—hurry, scout!”

jem held the bottom wire; dill and i rolled through and were halfway to the shelter of the schoolyard’s solitary oak when we sensed that jem was not with us. we ran back and found him struggling in the fence, kicking his pants off to get loose. he ran to the oak tree in his shorts.
mr. nathan radley was standing inside his gate, a shotgun broken across his arm. atticus was standing beside miss maudie and miss stephanie crawford. miss rachel and mr. avery were near by. none of them saw us come up.
i pulled him down beside me on the cot. i tried to reason with him. “mr. nathan’s gonna find ’em in the morning, jem. he knows you lost ’em. when he shows ’em to atticus it’ll be pretty bad, that’s all there is to it. go’n back to bed.”
i began to feel sick. going back to that place by himself—i remembered miss stephanie: mr. nathan had the other barrel waiting for the next sound he heard, be it nigger, dog . . . jem knew that better than i.
i pulled him down beside me on the cot. i tried to reason with him.mr. nathan’s gonna find ’em in the morning, jem. he knows you lost ’em. when he shows ’em to atticus it’ll be pretty bad, that’s all there is to it. go’n back to bed.
it was no use. i unlatched the back door and held it while he crept down the steps. it must have been two o’clock. the moon was setting and the lattice-work shadows were fading into fuzzy nothingness. jem’s white shirt-tail dipped and bobbed like a small ghost dancing away to escape the coming morning. a faint breeze stirred and cooled the sweat running down my sides.

he went the back way, through deer’s pasture, across the schoolyard and around to the fence, i thought—at least that was the way he was headed. it would take longer, so it was not time to worry yet. i waited until it was time to worry and listened for mr. radley’s shotgun. then i thought i heard the back fence squeak. it was wishful thinking. jem stayed moody and silent for a week. as atticus had once advised me to do, i tried to climb into jem’s skin and walk around in it: if i had gone alone to the radley place at two in the morning, my funeral would have been held the next afternoon. so i left jem alone and tried not to bother him.