the remainder of my schooldays were no more auspicious than the first. indeed, they were an endless project that slowly evolved into a unit, in which miles of construction paper and wax crayon were expended by the state of alabama in its well-meaning but fruitless efforts to teach me group dynamics. what jem called the dewey decimal system was school-wide by the end of my first year, so i had no chance to compare it with other teaching techniques. i could only look around me: atticus and my uncle, who went to school at home, knew everything—at least, what one didn’t know the other did. furthermore, i couldn’t help noticing that my father had served for years in the state legislature, elected each time without opposition, innocent of the adjustments my teachers thought essential to the development of good citizenship. jem, educated on a half-decimal half-duncecap basis, seemed to function effectively alone or in a group, but jem was a poor example: no tutorial system devised by man could have stopped him from getting at books. as for me, i knew nothing except what i gathered from time magazine and reading everything i could lay hands on at home, but as i inched sluggishly along the treadmill of the maycomb county school system, i could not help receiving the impression that i was being cheated out of something. out of what i knew not, yet i did not believe that twelve years of unrelieved boredom was exactly what the state had in mind for me.

as the year passed, released from school thirty minutes before jem, who had to stay until three o’clock, i ran by the radley place as fast as i could, not stopping until i reached the safety of our front porch. one afternoon as i raced by, something caught my eye and caught it in such a way that i took a deep breath, a long look around, and went back.
rather than risk a tangle with calpurnia, i did as jem told me. for some reason, my first year of school had wrought a great change in our relationship: calpurnia’s tyranny, unfairness, and meddling in my business had faded to gentle grumblings of general disapproval. on my part, i went to much trouble, sometimes, not to provoke her.
two days later dill arrived in a blaze of glory: he had ridden the train by himself from meridian to maycomb junction (a courtesy title—maycomb junction was in abbott county) where he had been met by miss rachel in maycomb’s one taxi; he had eaten dinner in the diner, he had seen two twins hitched together get off the train in bay st. louis and stuck to his story regardless of threats. he had discarded the abominable blue shorts that were buttoned to his shirts and wore real short pants with a belt; he was somewhat heavier, no taller, and said he had seen his father. dill’s father was taller than ours, he had a black beard (pointed), and he was president of the l & n railroad.
until it happened i did not realize that jem was offended by my contradicting him on hot steams, and that he was patiently awaiting an opportunity to reward me. he did, by pushing the tire down the sidewalk with all the force in his body. ground, sky and houses melted into a mad palette, my ears throbbed, i was suffocating. i could not put out my hands to stop, they were wedged between my chest and knees. i could only hope that jem would outrun the tire and me, or that i would be stopped by a bump in the sidewalk. i heard him behind me, chasing and shouting.
dill said, “jem, you and me can play and scout can watch if she’s scared.”



i was fairly sure boo radley was inside that house, but i couldn’t prove it, and felt it best to keep my mouth shut or i would be accused of believing in hot steams, phenomena i was immune to in the daytime.

jem parceled out our roles: i was mrs. radley, and all i had to do was come out and sweep the porch. dill was old mr. radley: he walked up and down the sidewalk and coughed when jem spoke to him. jem, naturally, was boo: he went under the front steps and shrieked and howled from time to time.

as the summer progressed, so did our game. we polished and perfected it, added dialogue and plot until we had manufactured a small play upon which we rang changes every day.

dill was a villain’s villain: he could get into any character part assigned him, and appear tall if height was part of the devilry required. he was as good as his worst performance; his worst performance was gothic. i reluctantly played assorted ladies who entered the script. i never thought it as much fun as tarzan, and i played that summer with more than vague anxiety despite jem’s assurances that boo radley was dead and nothing would get me, with him and calpurnia there in the daytime and atticus home at night.

jem was a born hero.

it was a melancholy little drama, woven from bits and scraps of gossip and neighborhood legend: mrs. radley had been beautiful until she married mr. radley and lost all her money. she also lost most of her teeth, her hair, and her right forefinger (dill’s contribution. boo bit it off one night when he couldn’t find any cats and squirrels to eat.); she sat in the livingroom and cried most of the time, while boo slowly whittled away all the furniture in the house.

the three of us were the boys who got into trouble; i was the probate judge, for a change; dill led jem away and crammed him beneath the steps, poking him with the brushbroom. jem would reappear as needed in the shapes of the sheriff, assorted townsfolk, and miss stephanie crawford, who had more to say about the radleys than anybody in maycomb.



when it was time to play boo’s big scene, jem would sneak into the house, steal the scissors from the sewing-machine drawer when calpurnia’s back was turned, then sit in the swing and cut up newspapers. dill would walk by, cough at jem, and jem would fake a plunge into dill’s thigh. from where i stood it looked real.

when mr. nathan radley passed us on his daily trip to town, we would stand still and silent until he was out of sight, then wonder what he would do to us if he suspected. our activities halted when any of the neighbors appeared, and once i saw miss maudie atkinson staring across the street at us, her hedge clippers poised in midair.

my nagging got the better of jem eventually, as i knew it would, and to my relief we slowed down the game for a while. he still maintained, however, that atticus hadn’t said we couldn’t, therefore we could; and if atticus ever said we couldn’t, jem had thought of a way around it: he would simply change the names of the characters and then we couldn’t be accused of playing anything.

dill was in hearty agreement with this plan of action. dill was becoming something of a trial anyway, following jem about. he had asked me earlier in the summer to marry him, then he promptly forgot about it. he staked me out, marked as his property, said i was the only girl he would ever love, then he neglected me. i beat him up twice but it did no good, he only grew closer to jem. they spent days together in the treehouse plotting and planning, calling me only when they needed a third party. but i kept aloof from their more foolhardy schemes for a while, and on pain of being called a g-irl, i spent most of the remaining twilights that summer sitting with miss maudie atkinson on her front porch.