atticus said professional people were poor because the farmers were poor. as maycomb county was farm country, nickels and dimes were hard to come by for doctors and dentists and lawyers. entailment was only a part of mr. cunningham’s vexations. the acres not entailed were mortgaged to the hilt, and the little cash he made went to interest. if he held his mouth right, mr. cunningham could get a wpa job, but his land would go to ruin if he left it, and he was willing to go hungry to keep his land and vote as he pleased. mr. cunningham, said atticus, came from a set breed of men.

as the cunninghams had no money to pay a lawyer, they simply paid us with what they had. “did you know,” said atticus, “that dr. reynolds works the same way? he charges some folks a bushel of potatoes for delivery of a baby. miss scout, if you give me your attention i’ll tell you what entailment is. jem’s definitions are very nearly accurate sometimes.”

if i could have explained these things to miss caroline, i would have saved myself some inconvenience and miss caroline subsequent mortification, but it was beyond my ability to explain things as well as atticus, so i said, “you’re shamin’ him, miss caroline. walter hasn’t got a quarter at home to bring you, and you can’t use any stovewood.”

miss caroline stood stock still, then grabbed me by the collar and hauled me back to her desk. “jean louise, i’ve had about enough of you this morning,” she said. “you’re starting off on the wrong foot in every way, my dear. hold out your hand.”

i thought she was going to spit in it, which was the only reason anybody in maycomb held out his hand: it was a time-honored method of sealing oral contracts. wondering what bargain we had made, i turned to the class for an answer, but the class looked back at me in puzzlement. miss caroline picked up her ruler, gave me half a dozen quick little pats, then told me to stand in the corner. a storm of laughter broke loose when it finally occurred to the class that miss caroline had whipped me.
when miss caroline threatened it with a similar fate the first grade exploded again, becoming cold sober only when the shadow of miss blount fell over them. miss blount, a native maycombian as yet uninitiated in the mysteries of the decimal system, appeared at the door hands on hips and announced: “if i hear another sound from this room i’ll burn up everybody in it. miss caroline, the sixth grade cannot concentrate on the pyramids for all this racket!”

my sojourn in the corner was a short one. saved by the bell, miss caroline watched the class file out for lunch. as i was the last to leave, i saw her sink down into her chair and bury her head in her arms. had her conduct been more friendly toward me, i would have felt sorry for her. she was a pretty little thing.
while walter piled food on his plate, he and atticus talked together like two men, to the wonderment of jem and me. atticus was expounding upon farm problems when walter interrupted to ask if there was any molasses in the house. atticus summoned calpurnia, who returned bearing the syrup pitcher. she stood waiting for walter to help himself. walter poured syrup on his vegetables and meat with a generous hand. he would probably have poured it into his milk glass had i not asked what the sam hill he was doing.



the silver saucer clattered when he replaced the pitcher, and he quickly put his hands in his lap. then he ducked his head.

atticus shook his head at me again. “but he’s gone and drowned his dinner in syrup,” i protested. “he’s poured it all over—”

it was then that calpurnia requested my presence in the kitchen.

she was furious, and when she was furious calpurnia’s grammar became erratic. when in tranquility, her grammar was as good as anybody’s in maycomb. atticus said calpurnia had more education than most colored folks.

when she squinted down at me the tiny lines around her eyes deepened. “there’s some folks who don’t eat like us,” she whispered fiercely, “but you ain’t called on to contradict ’em at the table when they don’t. that boy’s yo’ comp’ny and if he wants to eat up the table cloth you let him, you hear?”

“he ain’t company, cal, he’s just a cunningham—”

“hush your mouth! don’t matter who they are, anybody sets foot in this house’s yo’ comp’ny, and don’t you let me catch you remarkin’ on their ways like you was so high and mighty! yo’ folks might be better’n the cunninghams but it don’t count for nothin’ the way you’re disgracin’ ’em—if you can’t act fit to eat at the table you can just set here and eat in the kitchen!”

calpurnia sent me through the swinging door to the diningroom with a stinging smack. i retrieved my plate and finished dinner in the kitchen, thankful, though, that i was spared the humiliation of facing them again. i told calpurnia to just wait, i’d fix her: one of these days when she wasn’t looking i’d go off and drown myself in barker’s eddy and then she’d be sorry. besides, i added, she’d already gotten me in trouble once today: she had taught me to write and it was all her fault. “hush you fussin’,” she said.

jem and walter returned to school ahead of me: staying behind to advise atticus of calpurnia’s iniquities was worth a solitary sprint past the radley place. “she likes jem better’n she likes me, anyway,” i concluded, and suggested that atticus lose no time in packing her off.

“have you ever considered that jem doesn’t worry her half as much?” atticus’s voice was flinty. “i’ve no intention of getting rid of her, now or ever. we couldn’t operate a single day without cal, have you ever thought of that? you think about how much cal does for you, and you mind her, you hear?”

i returned to school and hated calpurnia steadily until a sudden shriek shattered my resentments. i looked up to see miss caroline standing in the middle of the room, sheer horror flooding her face. apparently she had revived enough to persevere in her profession.
the male population of the class rushed as one to her assistance. lord, i thought, she’s scared of a mouse. little chuck little, whose patience with all living things was phenomenal, said, “which way did he go, miss caroline? tell us where he went, quick! d.c.—” he turned to a boy behind him—“d.c., shut the door and we’ll catch him. quick, ma’am, where’d he go?”

miss caroline pointed a shaking finger not at the floor nor at a desk, but to a hulking individual unknown to me. little chuck’s face contracted and he said gently, “you mean him, ma’am? yessum, he’s alive. did he scare you some way?”

miss caroline said desperately, “i was just walking by when it crawled out of his hair . . . just crawled out of his hair—”

little chuck grinned broadly. “there ain’t no need to fear a cootie, ma’am. ain’t you ever seen one? now don’t you be afraid, you just go back to your desk and teach us some more.”

little chuck little was another member of the population who didn’t know where his next meal was coming from, but he was a born gentleman. he put his hand under her elbow and led miss caroline to the front of the room. “now don’t you fret, ma’am,” he said. “there ain’t no need to fear a cootie. i’ll just fetch you some cool water.”

the cootie’s host showed not the faintest interest in the furor he had wrought. he searched the scalp above his forehead, located his guest and pinched it between his thumb and forefinger.

miss caroline watched the process in horrid fascination. little chuck brought water in a paper cup, and she drank it gratefully. finally she found her voice. “what is your name, son?” she asked softly.

the boy blinked. “who, me?” miss caroline nodded.

“burris ewell.”

miss caroline inspected her roll-book. “i have a ewell here, but i don’t have a first name . . . would you spell your first name for me?”

“don’t know how. they call me burris’t home.”

“well, burris,” said miss caroline, “i think we’d better excuse you for the rest of the afternoon. i want you to go home and wash your hair.”

from her desk she produced a thick volume, leafed through its pages and read for a moment. “a good home remedy for—burris, i want you to go home and wash your hair with lye soap. when you’ve done that, treat your scalp with kerosene.”

“what fer, missus?”

“to get rid of the—er, cooties. you see, burris, the other children might catch them, and you wouldn’t want that, would you?”

the boy stood up. he was the filthiest human i had ever seen. his neck was dark gray, the backs of his hands were rusty, and his fingernails were black deep into the quick. he peered at miss caroline from a fist-sized clean space on his face. no one had noticed him, probably, because miss caroline and i had entertained the class most of the morning.
one of the elderly members of the class answered her: “he’s one of the ewells, ma’am,” and i wondered if this explanation would be as unsuccessful as my attempt. but miss caroline seemed willing to listen. “whole school’s full of ’em. they come first day every year and then leave. the truant lady gets ’em here ’cause she threatens ’em with the sheriff, but she’s give up tryin’ to hold ’em. she reckons she’s carried out the law just gettin’ their names on the roll and runnin’ ’em here the first day. you’re supposed to mark ’em absent the rest of the year . . .”

“but what about their parents?” asked miss caroline, in genuine concern.

“ain’t got no mother,” was the answer, “and their paw’s right contentious.”

burris ewell was flattered by the recital. “been comin’ to the first day o’ the first grade fer three year now,” he said expansively. “reckon if i’m smart this year they’ll promote me to the second. . . .”

miss caroline said, “sit back down, please, burris,” and the moment she said it i knew she had made a serious mistake. the boy’s condescension flashed to anger.
soon we were clustered around her desk, trying in our various ways to comfort her. he was a real mean one . . . below the belt . . . you ain’t called on to teach folks like that . . . them ain’t maycomb’s ways, miss caroline, not really . . . now don’t you fret, ma’am. miss caroline, why don’t you read us a story? that cat thing was real fine this mornin’. . . .

miss caroline smiled, blew her nose, said, “thank you, darlings,” dispersed us, opened a book and mystified the first grade with a long narrative about a toadfrog that lived in a hall.